Release OptaPlanner 9 (#582)
kiegroup/optaplanner-website: optaplanner-website-root/content/blog/2023/04/24/OptaPlanner-9-released.adoc

= OptaPlanner 9 has been released
rsynek
2023-04-24
:page-interpolate: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-tags: migration, jakarta, javax, javaee, quarkus, spring boot
:jbake-social_media_share_image: migration-flowchart.png

In the previous article link:../../02/21/OptaPlanner-9-is-coming.adoc[OptaPlanner 9 is coming] we explained why we are doing OptaPlanner 9.
Now OptaPlanner 9.37.0.Final has been released to enable users migrate to Jakarta EE, Quarkus 3 and Spring Boot 3.

== Differences between OptaPlanner 8 and 9

> OptaPlanner 8 and 9 are fully compatible regarding their APIs and equal feature-wise.

Reviewer: This is not technically true, right? The Hibernate change?

Author: Indeed, thanks for the reminder.

The differences are coming from package-level changes brought by Jakarta EE 10 that impact the entire Java ecosystem.
OptaPlanner has to react, too.
We decided to make the transition smooth by releasing two parallel streams: 8 and 9.

The following table summarizes the compatibility of both OptaPlanner streams:

[cols="1,1,1"]
|===
| ^|OptaPlanner 8 ^|OptaPlanner 9

|Jakarta EE
>|8 (via Quarkus)
>|10 (via Quarkus)

|Quarkus
>|2
>|3

|Spring Boot
>|2
>|3
|===

Apart from those, OptaPlanner 9 currently does not support DRL score calculation when used together with Quarkus.

> If you use the DRL score calculation and Quarkus, either wait with migration to OptaPlanner 9 or consider link:https://www.optaplanner.org/download/upgradeRecipe/drl-to-constraint-streams-migration.html[moving to the Constraint Streams API].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use the DRL score calculation, consider link:https://www.optaplanner.org/download/upgradeRecipe/drl-to-constraint-streams-migration.html[moving to the Constraint Streams API] as DRL has long since been deprecated.
```

== Which one to use?

> The link:../../02/21/OptaPlanner-9-is-coming.adoc[previous article] covers this question; let me shortly repeat how we recomment to approach:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The link:../../02/21/OptaPlanner-9-is-coming.adoc[previous article] covers this question; let me shortly repeat the recommended approach:
```
